---
layout: post
title:  "Physics Simulation of a Die in a Cup"
subtitle: "Theory of Machine Dynamics: Final Project"
subsubtitle: "MS in Robotics &#8212 Northwestern University"
categories: [ Python, Simulation, Dynamics]
image: assets/images/physics-sim.jpg
gif: assets/images/physics-sim.gif
when: December 2021
featured: false
hidden: false
---
In this simulation, a cup is held up by positive force applied in the $$y$$ direction, even experiencing some slight movement
upward, as expected. The die drops initially due to gravity, but it bounces of the wall of the cup when it encounters an
impact condition. The die remains within the bounds (walls) of the cup, demonstrating that the simulation is working
correctly. On impact, some of the kinetic energy of the die is transferred to the cup, causing it to shift slightly. Due to the
large mass of the cup, the displacement is negligible compared to the new motion of the die. 

<h5 style="font-family:montserrat">Rigid Body Transformations</h5>  
<h6 style="font-family:montserrat">SE(3) Configuration of the Cup in the World Frame:</h6>   
$$g_{wa} = \begin{bmatrix}\cos\theta_c & -\sin\theta_c & 0 & x_c \\ \sin\theta_c & \cos\theta_c & 0 & y_c \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1\end{bmatrix}$$
<br><br>

<h6 style="font-family:montserrat">SE(3) Configuration of the Die in the World Frame:</h6>  
$$g_{wf} = \begin{bmatrix}\cos\theta_d & -\sin\theta_d & 0 & x_d \\ \sin\theta_d & \cos\theta_d & 0 & y_d \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1\end{bmatrix}$$ 
<br>


<h5 style="font-family:montserrat">Calculations</h5> 
<h6 style="font-family:montserrat">Euler-Lagrange Equations</h6>   
To calculate the Euler-Lagrange equations, first I calculated the Lagrangian. The Lagrangian is the difference of kinetic energy and potential energy in the system. To calculate kinetic energy, the kinetic energies of the cup and die were summed. For both, the process to calculate kinetic energy was the same. The velocities were calculated using the respective rigid body transformations ($$g_{wa}$$ for the cup, and $$g_{wf}$$ for the die). The inverse of this transformation was multiplied by its derivative, and the result was unhatted. This matrix was tranposed then multiplied with the mass matrix, $$I$$, and itself to get kinetic energy. For potential energy, $$g_{wa}$$ and $$g_{wf}$$ were used to obtain $$y$$ values for the cup and die, respectively. Taking this $$y$$ and multiplying by the mass of the object ($$m_c$$ or $$m_d$$) and gravity ($$g$$) gave potential energy. Subtracting the total potential energy from kinetic energy resulted in the Lagrangian. From here, the Lagrangian was differentiated with respect to $$\dot{q}$$ and then $$t$$ to get $$\frac{d}{dt}\frac{\partial L}{\partial \dot{q}}$$R. Differentiating the Lagrangian with respect to $$q$$ and subtracting that from the previous result gave the Euler-Lagrange equations.
<h6 style="font-family:montserrat">Constraints</h6>  
For this system, there were no dynamic constraints on the rigid bodies. However, there were contraints in the form of impact conditions. These constraints were calculated using the rigid body transformations mentioned previously to get the position of the four corners of the die in the world frame. The inverse of the rigid body transformation $$g_{wa}$$ was then used to get the position of those points in the cup frame. With this, the impact constraints were calculated using the width and length of the cup. Each corner of the die could impact any of the cup walls, and therefore had four impact conditions, resulting in sixteen total impact conditions. The constraint equations were calculated taking the position of a corner on the die and comparing that to half the length or width of the cup (plus or minus). 
<h6 style="font-family:montserrat">External Forces</h6> 
For this simulation, the external forces are to be set by the user. The current setting applies an external force in the positive $$y$$ direction of the world frame that is roughly larger than the downward force of gravity.  
<h6 style="font-family:montserrat">Impact Update Laws</h6> 
The following impact update laws were observed:

$$p = \frac{\partial L}{\partial} \dot{q}\big|_{\tau_-}^{\tau_+} = \lambda\nabla\phi$$  

$$H = \big[\frac{\partial L}{\partial \dot{q}}\dot{q} - L\big]_{\tau_-}^{\tau_+} = 0$$  

Through each iteration of the simulation, the impact conditions were checked. If any of these were met (beyond a certain threshold), the impact update laws were calculated using new $$\dot{q}_+$$ variables.


